What is a vector database?
A vector database stores, manages and indexes high-dimensional vector data. Data points are stored as arrays of numbers called “vectors,” which are clustered based on similarity. This design enables low-latency queries, making it ideal for AI applications.

Vector databases are growing in popularity because they deliver the speed and performance needed to drive generative artificial intelligence (AI) use cases and applications. According to Gartner®, by 2026, more than 30% of enterprises will have adopted vector databases to build their foundation models with relevant business data.1

Vector databases versus traditional databases
Unlike traditional relational databases with rows and columns, data points in a vector database are represented by vectors with a fixed number of dimensions. Because they use high-dimensional vector embeddings, vector databases are better able to handle unstructured datasets.

The nature of data has undergone a profound transformation. It's no longer confined to structured information easily stored in traditional databases. Unstructured data—including social media posts, images, videos, audio clips and more—is growing 30% to 60% year over year.2

Relational databases excel at managing structured and semistructured datasets in specific formats. Loading unstructured data sources into a traditional relational database to store, manage and prepare the data for artificial intelligence (AI) is a labor-intensive process, especially with new generative use cases such as similarity search.

Traditional search typically represents data by using discrete tokens or features, such as keywords, tags or metadata. Traditional searches rely on exact matches to retrieve relevant results. For example, a search for "smartphone" would return results containing the word "smartphone."

Opposed to this, vector search represents data as dense vectors, which are vectors with most or all elements being nonzero. Vectors are represented in a continuous vector space, the mathematical space in which data is represented as vectors.

Vector representations enable similarity search. For example, a vector search for “smartphone” might also return results for “cellphone” and “mobile devices.”

Each dimension of the dense vector corresponds to a latent feature or aspect of the data. A latent feature is an underlying characteristic or attribute that is not directly observed but inferred from the data through mathematical models or algorithms.

Latent features capture the hidden patterns and relationships in the data, enabling more meaningful and accurate representations of items as vectors in a high-dimensional space.
What are vectors?
Vectors are a subset of tensors, which in machine learning (ML) is a generic term for a group of numbers—or a grouping of groups of numbers—in n-dimensional space. Tensors function as a mathematical bookkeeping device for data. Working up from the smallest element:

A scalar is a zero-dimensional tensor, containing a single number. For example, a system modeling weather data might represent a single day’s high temperature (in Fahrenheit) in scalar form as 85.

Then, a vector is a one-dimensional (or first-degree or first-order) tensor, containing multiple scalars of the same type of data. For example, a weather model might use the low, mean and high temperatures for a single day in vector form: 62, 77, 85. Each scalar component is a feature—that is, a dimension—of the vector, representing a feature of that day’s weather.
Vector numbers can represent complex objects such as words, images, videos and audio generated by an ML model. This high-dimensional vector data, containing multiple features, is essential to machine learning, natural language processing (NLP) and other AI tasks. Some example uses of vector data include:

Text: Chatbots need to understand natural language. They do this by relying on vectors that represent words, paragraphs and entire documents.

Images: Image pixels can be described by numerical data and combined to make up a high-dimensional vector for that image.

Speech or audio: Like images, sound waves can also be broken into numerical data and represented as vectors, enabling AI applications such as voice recognition.